Well, Zilinski and European leadersincluding Sakir Stalmer will speak toDonald Trump in an emergency summitlater today.
The Ukrainian presidentwill be in Berlin for the virtualmeeting, joining the German chancellorwho is hosting the talks.
It comes aheadof the US president's meeting withVladimir Putin in Alaska on Friday amidconcerns that the two leaders will forgethe makings of a peace deal withoutinput from Ukraine.It's impossible to talk about Ukrainewithout Ukraine and no one will acceptthat.
So the conversation between Putinand Trump may be important for theirbilateral track, but they cannot agreeon anything about Ukraine without us.[Applause]>> Well, Germany's Chancellor Friedri Murswill host the virtual meeting in Berlinat 1:00 this afternoon.
Sakistan joiningalongside the European CommissionPresident Ursula Vandelion plus VoladimZalinski also expected to take part.France's Emanuel Macron and the NATOgeneral secretary Mark Rutter.
Then attwo, European leaders will hold a callwith both Trump and his deputy JD Vanceas the meeting between the US presidentand Russia's Vladimir Putin edgescloser.
The third and final meeting isscheduled for today.
It will be chairedby Sakir.
He will speak to leaders ofthe so-called coalition of the willing,a group of countries working on plans tosupport Ukraine in the event of aceasefire.
Well, let's bring in oursecurity and defense analyst, ProfessorMichael Clark.
Uh, Michael, how muchlegitimately do you think the Europeanscan can stand to influence thesituation? Well, they have the influenceof being able to say that if this dealcompletely ignores Ukraine's interests,then Ukraine won't agree to it and thewar will go on whether you like it ornot.
So it won't be a successful peacearrangement that President Trump istrying to pursue.
And what it is thatthe Europeans are particularly concernedabout is the idea of territorial swapsthat would be completely unacceptable toUkraine.
And if you look at the map ofUkraine, I mean you can talk about lotsof areas up in the north, minor swaps atSumia Khakiv, the problem of Crimeawhich is effectively off the table,something in the south maybe.
But whatreally matters is this the Donbas thearea of the Donbas the area of Donetskwith Donbas's Luhansk and Donetsk andthis area of Don of the of Donetsk isnot conquered by the Russians.
TheUkrainians are holding it and thebriefing is that Putin is demanding thatthe Ukrainians withdraw from that beforehe will agree to a ceasefire.
And thatis completely and utterly unacceptableto uh Zalinski and he's made that veryclear in the last 24 hours becausethey've got a very um heavily fortifiedstrip of territory here between the fourcities from Slavansk through toCostantineka.
Um and if they give upthat sort of fortress belt, it'll bemuch harder for the Ukrainians toprevent the Russians eventually movingfurther westwards towards the the NepraRiver.
And so this is their best lastline of defense in eastern Ukraine.
Ifthey give that up, then the Russianspotentially could move a much muchfurther westwards as Ukrainians believethey will.
Whatever the Russianspromise, they will eventually try tomove into other parts of Ukraine.
And sothis is the the map uh the potential mapin a way that really worries theEuropeans and Zilinski.
And they'll beputting pressure as far as they can onon the United States and on Trump to sayplease be aware of this when you go intoyour meeting with President Putin.European nations and you talk thereabout the ability of Ukraine to holdthat line to keep Russia out of thatpocket of Daetsk.
European nations haveenabled that in part through the aidthey've given to Ukraine and not justmilitary aid but but aid across theboard and and they've given so much nowthey've surpassed the US in doing so.With that in mind, Michael, why doesEurope struggle to get any seat at anynegotiating table here?>> Because ultimately United States backingis is critical to Ukraine.
Ukrainewouldn't have lasted this long withoutthe United States.
And although it canfight on without any United States helpin the future, it would be much harder.And remember, we talk about the US andEurope as if they're comparable groups,as it were.
But the US is one country,and it's put in about $120 billion worthof aid, not the 350 that President Trumpkeeps talking about and quoting.
I don'tknow where he gets that figure from.
Thereal figure is 120 billion.
And theEuropeans have put in about 260 billion.But the European aid has only justramped up in the last 18 months or so.And so the the importance of the UnitedStates is that, you know, withoutAmerican uh high-tech weaponry andparticularly without Americanintelligence help, which has stillflowed with one or two interruptions,but it still flows.
Without that, thenUkraine would find it much moredifficult to carry on.
Not impossible,but much more difficult.
And the factis, you know, you need the superpowerson your side if you're going to resist apower like Russia that's trying todestroy you as an independent country.>> Um, using the hypothetical dice ofinfluence, Michael, how many more rollsdoes Europe have left?>> I'm sorry.
How many how many more rollsof the dice of influence does>> How many more rolls? Yeah, rolls of thedice.
Well, this is the last good one.Um, but I don't think this will be theend of a process.
I mean, what happensin in Anchorage, I'm sure, will be thebeginning of another process of furtherdiscussions, further technicalitiesbefore a ceasefire might be called.
Wedon't know.
President Trump mightsuddenly turn really tough on PresidentPutin, but it doesn't look as if he'sabout to do that.
Um, on the basis ofwhat's happened so far, this will justcarry on for a bit and the Europeanswill still have a have a voice to uh beheard.
But this is a really importantjuncture because things could go badlywrong after this meeting.
If it reallydoesn't go well for Ukraine, thingscould get worse much more quickly.
Ifit's not the worst outcome, then theEuropeans will have a couple more rollsof dice.
But this is the best last hope,the the best hope um in the presentperiod in n 2025 to 2026 in which theycould have their voices understood bythe Trump administration in Washington.not just heard, they get heard, but arethey understood by the uh people aroundTrump and the particularlyadministrative administration officialsthat are handling all of the backgroundto this Anything.